# cochran-grace-cos226-hw5
Contains five commits for a pair of hash tables, the commits analyzing, and improving upon the hash tables each commit.

Commit One(1):
The initial and first version of my hash tables uses a linear probing insert method, with the size of the tables being the same as the size of the csv dataset. There were no empty spaces left between the two hash tables, however, the time taken for both tables to be created was about 15 seconds. In addition, the amount of collisions between the two hash tables was quite large, with 91550138 collisions from the title-oriented hash table, and 96570520 collisions from the  quote-oriented hash table. I suspect the hash-key calculating function is what's causing this amount of collisions, and I plan on improving it in my next commit. I also hope that this commit will be my least optimized version of these hash tables, so that I may see heavy improvements when i get to my fifth and final commit.

Commit two(2):
The program's insertion method is the same as my last commit, so the amount of empty spaces is still zero, but the one thing I changed was how I calculated my hash key, with my hash key function's algorithm using bit-shifting and a for-loop now. The change in my hash key function improved my program drastically, as the hash tables now take around half a second to be created. As well as this, the amount of collisions that occurred dropped significantly, as the title-oriented hash table encountered 854650 collisions, while the quote-oriented hash table encountered 1302967 collisions. I am happy with how much better this second commit has performed compared to the first.

Commit three(3):
This time, I changed the insertion method from linear probing to a linked list insert, where a collision now results in an addition to an index's linked list. The creation of the hash tables still takes around half a second, but the amount of collisions has dropped even further than my second commit. My title-oriented hash table now encountered 14614 collisions, while my quote-oriented hash table encountered 11668. However, now that I have changed my program to have an insertion method that doesn't rely on the size of the data set, there was a considerable amount of wasted space within the tables, including 7740 empty indexes from the title-oriented hash table, and 6939 empty indexes from the quote-oriented hash table. In my next two commits, I plan to focus on lowering the amount of empty spaces.

Commit four(4):
For this commit, my main change was that instead of having my table size as a static variable, I had my program calculate an optimal size for my hash tables by dividing the data set's found size by a load factor, then making the size the first prime number larger than it. The time it took to create the hash tables was still around half a second, but the combined total of collisions and wasted space in this commit was notably less than last commit, with 36838 collisions and empty indexes now compared to 40961 in commit three. To be more specific with this commit's data, my title-oriented hash table encountered 10126 collisions and 11359 empty indexes, while my quote-oriented hash table encountered 5811 collisions and 9542 empty indexes. The amount of collisions has decreased even further, yet the amount of empty space has increased. If optimizing the size didn't help the amount of empty space, I may have to focus on my hash key function for my next and final commit.

Commit five(5): 
My last change for this homework was to attempt to improve upon the algorithm of my hash key function once more. I managed to get my title-oriented hash table down to 9937 collisions and 11325 empty indexes, while my quote-oriented hash table got down to 5604 collisions and 9466 empty indexes. This brings my total collisions and wasted space from both tables to 36332, around 500 less from last commit's 36838. Oddly enough, the time it took to create the two hash tables has now lengthened to around two seconds. While this commit's optimization impact was definitely the least compared to changes between other commits of mine in this homework, I am very proud of how much optimization I managed to do from my first commit's results. I also feel I've gained a good understanding of the benefits and setbacks of different insertion methods, as well as changing variables and functions like the hash table size and hash key algorithms.
